Add GSoC 2026 LateNight QML rebuild introductory post (#430)
mixxxdj/website: content/news/XXXX-XX-XX-gsoc-2026-rebuild-latenight-qml.md

---

## Milestone 1: Legacy Library Integration Completed!

I am incredibly excited to share that the first core milestone of this project has already been completed and merged in [PR #16489](https://github.com/mixxxdj/mixxx/pull/16489)! This PR successfully bridges Mixxx's legacy QWidget-based Library into the new QML engine.

Here is a sneak peek at the first draft of the LateNight QML theme in action:

![LateNight QML First Draft]({static}/images/news/latenight_qml_first_draft.png)

### Check out the Demo Video:

@Video(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3SaJFgAsCI)

---

## How to Test It Right Now

If you are a developer or a curious user who builds Mixxx from source, you can try out the new experimental LateNight QML skin today!

Follow these steps to run and test it:

> 

Reviewer: Maybe it's obvious for developers but a hint that they need to build the `main` branch would clarify that for all.

Nice read btw 👍

title: "GSoC 2026: Rebuilding the LateNight Theme in QML"
authors: Ayush Sah (arsenic)
status: draft
tags: gsoc, gsoc-2026, development, UI, QML, LateNight
comments: yes
summary: Introducing the Google Summer of Code 2026 project to port and rebuild Mixxx's beloved LateNight skin as a native, modern, and highly-performant QML theme.

Hi everyone! I am Ayush Sah, and I am thrilled to share that I will be working with Mixxx for Google Summer of Code (GSoC) 2026. Over the next few months, my project will focus on one of the most exciting shifts in Mixxx’s user interface history: **rebuilding the iconic LateNight theme in native QML**.

> As Mixxx paves the way toward the landmark 3.0 release, transitioning its user interface to the ["New UI"](https://mixxx.org/news/2025-08-06-qml-project/) is a core priority. Built on [Qt Quick / QML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QML), this shift unlocks modern aesthetics, fluid layout customization, and vector-based scaling. My goal is to ensure that LateNight, arguably one of Mixxx's most popular skins, is fully ported to QML with perfect visual and functional parity, serving as a clean blueprint for future community-made QML themes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As Mixxx moves toward the 3.0 release, introducing the ["New UI"](https://mixxx.org/news/2025-08-06-qml-project/) which will be 100% based on [Qt Quick / QML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QML). This is a technology that unlocks modern aesthetics, fluid layout customization, and vector-based scaling.
As a practical step toward that goal, I am developing a full QML port of the LateNight skin. It will deliver visual and functional parity with the classic design while providing a clean, real‑world reference for future community QML themes. This work aligns fully with the New UI effort, as both share the same underlying QML codebase.
```

Author: On a second read:
"As Mixxx moves toward the 3.0 release, introducing the "New UI" which will be 100% based on Qt Quick / QML."
doesnt read well. 
It could just be "Mixxx moves toward the 3.0 release, introducing the "New UI" which will be 100% based on Qt Quick / QML." instead. WDYT? @JoergAtGithub

---

## Why QML?

> Mixxx's legacy skin system is driven by complex XML and QSS (Qt Style Sheets). It has served the project well, but it is increasingly difficult to maintain and does not naturally support the kind of responsive, animated, and scalable interface work expected from modern applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mixxx's legacy skin system is driven by complex XML and QSS (Qt Style Sheets) and generates thousands of QWidget instances at start-up, which takes a lot of time. Thi legacy skin system has served the project well, but it is increasingly difficult to maintain and does not naturally support the kind of responsive, animated, and scalable interface work expected from modern applications.
```

Reviewer 3: Thi legacy skin system --> This legacy skin system

By moving LateNight to native QML, we aim to achieve:

> 1. **Modern Typography & Pixel-Perfect Scaling**: Dynamic scaling across 4K displays, retina screens, and touchscreen laptops.

Reviewer 2: Why touchscreen? I think only the resolution matters in this context. More relevant would be an example of a small screen like an Raspberry Pi.

Reviewer 3: Androidphone/tabled = touch

Reviewer 2: But LateNight is not made for touch - this does not fit in this context

> 2. **Hardware-Accelerated Rendering**: Leveraging modern, native graphics APIs, specifically **Apple Metal** on macOS and **Microsoft DirectX** on Windows, instead of legacy OpenGL. This keeps the CPU free to focus entirely on real-time audio processing, while the GPU handles UI and waveform rendering.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Hardware-Accelerated Rendering**: Leveraging modern, native graphics APIs, specifically **Apple Metal** on macOS and **Microsoft DirectX** on Windows, instead of legacy OpenGL. This keeps the CPU free to focus on tasks like real-time audio processing and the application logic, while the GPU handles UI and waveform rendering.
```

> 3. **Theme Extensibility**: Standardized, modular structure (`res/qml/themes/LateNight`) that other developers can use to construct their own custom layouts without duplicating core logic.

Reviewer 2: Please fix this relative path to what you implemented

That makes LateNight an ideal candidate for this port. It is familiar to many existing users, demanding enough to prove that QML can support a serious DJ workflow, and compact enough to complement the larger, touch-oriented direction of Mixxx's New UI.

---

## Design Choice: Laptops vs. Small Touch Screens

An interesting distinction between the theme layouts is how they address screen space. While the [New UI](https://mixxx.org/news/2025-08-06-qml-project/) features larger but fewer widgets optimized for touchscreen setups and tablet DJs, LateNight is packed with tiny widgets. This compact style is highly optimized for traditional laptop displays and desktop environments, where DJs want to maximize the amount of info and controls visible on a single screen without needing touch gestures. I know there are a lot of LateNight lovers in the community and I hope you all will like this new version of LateNight, a QML version, in which I'm trying my best to restore the same look and feel!

---

> ## Strategic Scope Reduction for a Stable Release

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Scope Reduction for the GSoC timeframe
```

> The guiding constraint for this project is the 12-week GSoC timeline. Every technical decision has to balance ambition with the need to deliver something reliable, reviewable, and useful by the end of the program. That is why the project scope is deliberately focused on the LateNight QML skin itself, while avoiding large backend rewrites that would turn this into a separate infrastructure project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The guiding constraint for this project is the GSoC timeline - by the end of the summer, the goal is to deliver something ready to be included in the following 2.x release. Every technical decision has to balance ambition with the need to deliver something reliable, reviewable, and useful by the end of the program. That is why the project scope is deliberately focused on the LateNight QML skin itself, while avoiding large backend rewrites that would turn this into a separate infrastructure project.
```

Reviewer 3: summer = northern hemisphere

Reviewer 2: 🙃 But the program is not called Google Winter of Code

Reviewer 3: ;-)

Author: Line 72 already talks about the 2.x release target. Is this change really necessary here? I don't mind but still.

Reviewer 2: I don't mind as well...

Author: sure 😃

A fully native QML library would require a new library backend. Today, the legacy library backend and legacy library widgets are tightly coupled, so replacing only the visual layer is not enough. Building that backend properly is important future work, but it is too large and too risky to combine with a 12-week theme port.

Instead, we chose a pragmatic middle ground: safely bridging the existing C++ library widgets into the QML viewport. This lets the project move forward with QML while keeping the music library stable and fully usable from day one. The same reasoning applies to preferences: for now, the legacy preferences dialog is being bridged and adapted to the new skin, rather than replaced outright.

---

## Planned Project Steps

To make the scope of the project clear, here are the main areas of work planned for the LateNight QML port. **Wherever possible, we will reuse components from Mixxx's New UI** and focus this project on the parts that make LateNight distinct: its compact layout, laptop-friendly workflow, and familiar visual structure.

**Reusing components from the New UI**

> - **Decks and stem waveforms**: Recreating LateNight's compact deck layout while reusing Mixxx's native QML waveform rendering, including the stacked waveform view for individual stems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Decks and stem waveforms**: Recreating LateNight's compact deck layout while reusing Mixxx's native QML waveform rendering, and providing controls for stems and beat-grid editing.
```

- **Deck controls**: Connecting playback controls such as play, cue, sync, loops, pitch/rate controls, hotcues, and beatgrid tools using the shared QML logic already developed for the New UI.

**Building shared infrastructure**

> - **Effects, samplers, and Mic/Aux racks**: Integrating these sections in a way that can support both LateNight QML and the New UI, reducing duplicated work between skins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Effects, samplers, and Mic/Aux racks**: Adding these missing QML elements in a way that can support both LateNight QML and the New UI, reducing duplicated work between skins.
```
